---
title: "Week 6"
---

# Week 6

## 9/24 - Introduction: The Age of Thoroughbass

Today we'll dive into the Baroque period. Our focus will be on the method of
accompanying from a thoroughbass. This seemingly minor technical innovation was
actually so important to baroque composers and performers that the baroque
period has been called "The Age of Thoroughbass." We'll introduce two pieces by
Monteverdi that use thoroughbass accompaniments, and we'll also take a moment
to revisit two of the madrigals from the last unit.

* Introduction to the Baroque
  * Revisiting _Il lamento d'Arianna_ and "Cruda Amarilli"
  * Thoroughbass and continuo accompaniment
  * Monteverdi, _Orfeo_, "Tu sei morta"
* Review of figured bass symbols
* Guidelines for interpreting unfigured basses
* The "Lament Bass"
  * Monteverdi, "Il lamento della ninfa" (from the Eighth Book of Madrigals)

Terms: Thoroughbass, _Basso continuo_ Figured bass, Unfigured bass, realization, reduction, Lament bass, opera, _Stile recitativo_.

**Handout**: [Il lamento della ninfa](lamento-della-ninda.pdf)

**Handout**: [Figured Bass Notation](figured-bass-notation.pdf)

**Handout**: [Early Unfigured Bass Guideliness](17th-c-guidelines.pdf)

## 9/25 - Drill

Today in drill we'll review the "Lament Bass" pattern and then work on
harmonizing an unfigured bass by Monteverdi.

* Review: The lament bass
* Exercise: Devising an accompaniment for "Si dolce e il tormento"

Please bring the worksheet with you to drill:

**Worksheet**: [Monteverdi, Si dolce e'il tormento](worksheet-si-dolce-e-il-tormento.pdf)

## 9/26 - Basso ostinato variations

Today we'll be looking at several _basso ostinato_, or "Ground Bass" patterns,
and at a few pieces that use them. We'll also discuss another great English
composer: Henry Purcell.

* [HW5](HW-5.pdf) (due next Monday)
* Ostinato basses and variations
  * The Passacaglia
  * The Ciacona (chaconne)
  * The Follia
* Corelli, Ciacona (Trio Sonata in G, Op. 2, no. 12)
* Some background on Purcell

**Handout**: [The Rule of the Octave]("rule-of-the-octave.pdf")

Terms: Basso ostinato, ground bass, variation, Passacaglia, ciacona, follia.

## 9/27 - Drill

Today in drill we'll review the "Rule of the Octave" and then work on
harmonizing an unfigured bass by Purcell.

Please bring the worksheet with you to drill:

**Worksheet**: [Unfigured Bass Practice](worksheet-rule-of-the-octave.pdf)

## 9/28 - The improvised prelude

Reminder: [HW5](HW-5.pdf) is due before lecture on Monday.

Today we'll be looking at another genre associated with improvisation: the free
keyboard prelude. We'll discuss the practical and conceptual background of the
genre, and look at examples by Le Roux, Purcell, Bach, and François Couperin.

(We'll also have a special guest performer!)

* Purcell,
* Bach, Prelude in C major, WTC I
* Couperin, Prelude in G minor from _L'art de toucher le clavecin_

**Handout**: [Preludes](preludes.pdf)

Terms: Prelude, "preluding", improvisation
