---
title: "Week 7"
---

# Week 7

## 10/01 - The Baroque Suite

This week we'll look at two of the principal multi-movement genres in the
baroque: the dance suite and the sonata (or concerto) "da chiesa". Today
we'll introduce the suite and the core dance types, and study a little
keyboard suite by Handel.

[Presentation](dance-suite-presentation.pdf)

Reminder: [Homework 5](HW-5.pdf) is due on Thursday!

* Suite and Sonata
* The core dances
  * Allemande
  * Courante
  * Sarabande
  * Gigue
* Handel, Suite in D minor (CP:142)

## 10/02 - Drill

Today you'll practice extracting a figured bass from a piece of keyboard music.
This is in preparation for an upcoming homework assignment.  We'll also study
two dance movements from a Corelli Concerto Grosso.

* Questions on HW 5
* Extracting a figured bass from a Bach minuet
* Corelli, Concerto Grosso in C major, Op. 6, no. 10 (CP: 107)

Please bring [this worksheet](worksheet-bach-minuet.pdf) with you to drill

## 10/03 - The _Sonata da chiesa_

Today we'll look at examples of the Corellian "church" sonata and concerto.
We'll also spend some time studying a few of the sequence patterns that Corelli
likes to use.

* Sequences in Corelli
* The "Church Sonata" (and Concerto)
* Corelli, Concerto Grosso in G minor, Op. 6, no. 8 (CP: 103)
* Corelli, Trio Sonata in D, Op. 3, no. 2 (CP: 115)

## 10/04 - Drill

[Homework 5](HW-5.pdf) is due before drill.

* Writing exercise: Sequences in the style of Corelli
* Handel, "Pena Tiranna" (CP: 161)
  * [Translation](/translations/pena-tiranna.html)

Please bring [this worksheet](worksheet-corelli-sequences.pdf) with you to drill

## 10/05 - Fall Break

No lecture.
