---
hitle: "Week 8"
---

# Week 8

## 10/08 - Ritornello Forms

Today we'll look at the "Ritornello Form", which is commonly used in
solo concertos and arias. There is some German terminology to learn here,
and we'll study a couple of great pieces by Bach and Vivaldi.

Reminder: [Homework 6](HW-6.pdf) is due on Friday!

* Review: Binary and da capo forms
* Ritornello Forms
  * Handel, *Amadigi*, "Pena Tiranna" (CP:161, review from Thursday)
  * Bach, Mass in B minor, Agnus Dei (CP:240, [Translation](/translations/mass.html#agnus-dei))
  * Bach, *St. Matthew Passion*, "Erbarme dich" (CP:235, [Translation](/translations/erbarme-dich.html))
* The Vivaldian Ritornello
  * Vivaldi: Concerto in A minor, mvts. ii and iii (CP:124)

[Presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1-ewzePFyKEObYhvM-Ses2aN-dxEtt3SUB3dDbeDyaVs/edit?usp=sharing)

Handout: [Ritornello Form](ritornello-form.pdf)

Handout: [A Vivaldi Ritornello](vivaldi-ritornello-map.pdf)

**Terms**: Ritornello, Ritornello form, Vordersatz, Fortspinnung, Epilog.

## 10/09 - Drill

Today you'll practice realizing a figured bass in trio-sonata texture.
Please bring this worksheet with you to drill:

[Worksheet](worksheet-handel-figured-bass.pdf)

## 10/10 - The Baroque Fugue

Today we'll introduce the Fugue, which sometimes seems like the quintessential
baroque genre—largely because of the importance we place on Bach, and particularly
on Bach's *Well-Tempered Clavier*, a collection of preludes and fugues in all the
major and minor keys.

[Presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1SAMsCrVjLZGkc3Hl2hm2gJLPUIIh1SFWpTDL2duSitk/edit?usp=sharing)

* Bach: Prelude and Fugue in C major
  * [Analysis](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qodY3wzjhpE)
* Bach: Prelude and Fugue in C# major
  * [Analysis](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DkndFX_PkwA)

Terms: Fugue, lots of [analytical terminology](fugue-terminology.pdf).

## 10/11 - Drill

In today's drill, we'll practice writing "real" and "tonal" answers to fugue subjects.
This is in preparation for Project 2, which is a fugue-composition project.

Please bring [the worksheet](worksheet-fugue-subjects-and-answers.pdf) with you to drill.

## 10/12 - More on the Fugue

Reminder [Homework 6](HW-6.pdf) is due before lecture!

And on Friday we'll be continuing with Bach fugues. Today we'll study a couple
of great fugues that are a little bit different from the fugues of the WTC. We'll
also discuss the last two assigments for Unit 2.

[Presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1DTcKtJ38Oo0vXrCgiDFxyzkHjKyOrglLlNpWIj1fdXM/edit?usp=sharing)

* Upcoming assignments:
  * [HW 7](HW-7.pdf) due **next Wednesday** (10/17)
  * [Project 2](Project-2.pdf) due **the following Monday** (10/22)
* Bach, Violin Sonata in G minor, Adagio and Fugue
  * [Clean copy of score](bach-violin-sonata.pdf)
* Bach, Toccata in E minor, Fugue
  * **Handout**: [Diagram of exposition](handout-bach-toccata-exposition.pdf)
