---
title: "Week 12"
---

# Week 12

## 11/05 - The Classical Minuet

**Reminder**: [HW 8](HW-8.pdf) is due before class

**Reminder**: [HW 9](HW-9.pdf) is due on Friday!

Today four of the AIs will present the late-eighteenth-century
minuet, which was the most important social dance of the period,
as well as being used as the third movement of symphonies, string
quartets, and other similar pieces.

* The minuet as a genre
* The minuet from Mozart, Quartet in GM, K.156
* The minuet from Haydn, Symphony 104
* Hypermeter

## 11/06 - Drill

In drill today we'll:

* Review the Sentence and Period
* Practice harmonic analysis
* Work a bit with Hypermeter

Additional Score: [Mozart, Symphony in Gm, K.550, minuet](k550-minuet.pdf)

## 11/07 - Larger Binary Forms

Today we'll introduce the concept of "Topics". Then we'll look at a
slightly larger Binary form movement: the first movement of one of
Mozart's early "Milanese" String Quartets.  The form is still the
same as it was in the minuets from Monday and Tuesday, but we'll
see that Mozart does more to dramatize the key "moves" of that form.

* Topics
* Rounded Binary Form Review
* Mozart, K.156, i: Presto (CP 59)

**Handout**: [Smaller Binary Forms](handout-smaller-binary-forms.pdf)

**Handout**: [Larger Binary Forms](handout-bigger-binary-forms.pdf)

## 11/08 - Drill

In drill today we'll review binary form terminology, and then
study the slow movement from the little Mozart Quartet in G.

## 11/09 - Sonata Form

**Reminder**: [HW 9](HW-9.pdf) is due before lecture!

And today we'll officially start looking at Sonata Form. We've already
discussed a sonata-form movement using the terminology for rounded binary
form, so the general principles here will be familiar. But today we'll be
introducing the standard terminology for sonata form itself, some of
which is review from T152 and some of which is probably new.

**Handout**: [Sonata Form](handout-sonata-form.pdf)
